

### There are some topics in "other rivers" I wish you would further explore 

I am sure you have received many praises for "other rivers", but I would like to share my thoughts about "other rivers", which is there are some topics I wish you would further explore.

Before I get into that let me introduce myself first. I went to college in 1994, two years earlier than your Fuling students. When I first read your "river town", do you know what resonated with the most ? "Every time I read a student’s summary of the story, something inside of me tightened and I nearly responded: Leave the mountain alone, you old jackass." Oh yes, no more "The Foolish Man Who Moved the Mountain” please!

So when I read these words in "other rivers", “But we should not give up eating for fear of choking. ... I tried to explain that no matter how beautiful the characters are in Chinese, they sound terrible in English." I just can't help chuckling. Man, we have not improved a lot in this area, haven't we! And my son's English textbook still teaches them "The Foolish Man Who Moved the Mountain”.

The second thing I would like to say about myself I am an avid reader but I mostly read nonfiction books. For me, the real life stories are for more exciting, fascinating and also more personal. For example, my hero is Ernest Shackleton and my favorite book of all time is ["Endurance" by Alfred Lansing](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Endurance:_Shackleton's_Incredible_Voyage). I have read the book so many times, just like you said in "rive town" that you would read Ted Williams’s autobiography "every spring for the rest of your life".

The last fiction book I read is "1984" many years ago. I re-read it during the Covid period because the feeling was so similar and I was once again captivated by George Orwell's words and imagination.

So I have a feeling that we may have similar taste.

Now back to "other river", I guess I am not your target audiences because I am familiar with most of things you wrote in the book. But I also guess you may not target audiences in mind when your wrote "other rivers" and you just wrote a long summary of your two years stay in Chengdu. Unfortunately, reading your book this time does not give me the joy of reading “river town". The story stricks me most is the story of Li Dewei. Second to that is the pandemic versions of ”Animal Farm“ that students are banned from drinking soda, which is available only to Mr. Hessler. Maybe I can add the story of the shit version of Li Bai's poem. In my son's version, it is "床前明月光*，*小偷爬进窗" or "日照香炉生紫烟，李白来到太平间" (It is always about Li Bai).

Other than these three stories, I would say I have read more interesting/sad/striking stories for our covid story and our education. I also think that there are many topics in the book you can further explore and you didn't. Let me give you some examples,

1. Atheist. You are correct that most of us are atheists, me included. For me, it is simple, there is no evidence that God exists and having faith is totally different from believing in God. But for someone like me, who never lives in US, I am so surprised to learn that there are so many people believe in God. Why and why it happens in the most science advanced country in the world? There is no science evidence at all and didn't Charles Darwin had demonstrated once for all we were not created by God? Here in China people don't claim they are religious in public or people might see you differently. But I heard in US it is the opposite, people don't claim they are non-religious. My friend told me that people might treat you differently. I always hope someone who has experiences of living in both countries can explore and explain this topic. You can be perfect candidate for that.
2. Jubao. Jubao is the cancer of our culure. Having living through that I have hoped to see you give a different narrative than the current version, e.g. how will you compare Jubao with McCarthyism or witch hunting ?
3. Leighton Stuart. I don't know if you read his memoir, "Fifty years in China". If you do, I would like to know how much you would resonate with his story.
4. John Dewey. I believe John Dewey is not well-known figure even in US. I know him because of 胡适, once a Dewey’s PhD student. 胡适 is also my hero. John Dewey's influence (as well as 胡适) in China was totally wiped out In 1950s. So seeing you mentioned him several times in the book is also a bit surprise but I had hope you can go deeper with him. BTW, I have not read John Dewey's book "[China, Japan and the USA.](https://www.gutenberg.org/files/28393/28393-h/28393-h.htm)" and I plan to read it and see if I can learn something I don't know before.
5. Xue Tao’s poem. You mentioned Ariel and Natasha’s class memorized one of Xue Tao’s poems. That was a little surprise because from what I know Xue Tao’s poems are not listed as the must learned poems for primary students. Maybe that is because most of her poem are romantic poems. So what was the girls reaction to romantic poems and what are girls reaction to romantic poems at that ages in US ? Does it feel like reading the Cinderella story ?



Last, I will add that these three books about China written by foreigners are the ones I like most.

1. "[Travel in China](https://www.gutenberg.org/files/28729/28729-h/28729-h.htm)" by Sir [John Barrow](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sir_John_Barrow,_1st_Baronet) in 1804. I was amazed by his astute, sharp and poignant observation of China and Chines people. More than 200 years have passed but some of his observations are still relevant. In CHAP. VII. **Government—Laws** he wrote "it is sufficiently evident, that the heavy hand of power has completely overcome and moulded to its own shape the physical character of the people, and that their moral sentiments and actions are swayed by the opinions, and almost under the entire dominion, of the government." It certainly feels this way under the current leader.
2. [Chinese Character](https://archive.org/details/cu31924023247160) by [Arthur Henderson Smith](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Arthur_Henderson_Smith) in 1894. Again, I was amazed by his astute and poignant observation of Chines people. And how much of his observations are still relevant to these days!
3. [Mr. China: A Memoir](https://www.amazon.com/Mr-China-Memoir-Tim-Clissold/dp/0060761407/ref=sr_1_1?crid=2U1S8ZJ0I5GED&dib=eyJ2IjoiMSJ9.s8SNOkqKpwZYO-HGRL8N5SwL8GL-xTFpnQgqi4gudeAKg4s5xkp9JqU4OE8N1hkKLOwHLDNbRXMnbOvFYwu1JSPb6ABXBRnjJrHpOgJ9p8wnc1T5YHH0se0nPYA4RJkZXdxOLGdO_WIk4zBIX3eCrPnxJfVjy3WmlVSGCTpBIOR3kXQ-Zcgo_cWsj-2YKIPta1QSwl8U7c2HI8SM6XS7AaI6GlSq88q-P4BSGVe7pRU.6oNfyEiGeXO0WZG17uy9rE9mVQOMvSSxfdg-BPv6PIk&dib_tag=se&keywords=mr+china&qid=1723947468&s=books&sprefix=mr+chia%2Cstripbooks%2C934&sr=1-1) by Tim Clissold. His story happened at same time as your river town and also in Sichun. What a coincidence!
